

















 Department of Computer Science UBIT University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.





AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER ASSIGNMENT





Submitted to

Sir ADNAN ZAIDI













Dated: 31st of January, 2020








Abstract

This report contains all the details of the data analysis of Autism Spectrum Disorder disease. Autism Spectrum Disorder disease in Pakistan is lagging behind other countries. This is partially because of lack of technology implementation at ground zero. To address the issue, we are analyzing the disease through Model Training, SKTLearn Library to predict and classify Autism Spectrum Disorder Data Set and all this come under Deep Learning using Python.
The Data set has been given by a clinic privately and so their name is not mentioned in this report.


 Introduction

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that begins early in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. It affects how a person acts and interacts with others, communicates, and learns. It includes what used to be known as Asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorders.

It is called a "spectrum" disorder because people with ASD can have a range of symptoms. People with ASD might have problems talking with you, or they might not look you in the eye when you talk to them. They may also have restricted interests and repetitive behaviors. They may spend a lot of time putting things in order, or they may say the same sentence again and again. They may often seem to be in their "own world."


What is Autism Spectrum Disorder?


     Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder that affects communication and behavior.    Although autism can be diagnosed at any age, it is said to be a “developmental disorder” because symptoms generally appear in the first two years of life.

According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), a guide created by the American Psychiatric Association used to diagnose mental disorders, people with ASD have:


? Difficulty with communication and interaction with other people

? Restricted interests and repetitive behaviors

? Symptoms that hurt the person’s ability to function properly in school, work, and other areas of life

Autism is known as a “spectrum” disorder because there is wide variation in the type and severity of symptoms people experience. ASD occurs in all ethnic, racial, and economic groups. Although ASD can be a lifelong disorder, treatments and services can improve a person’s symptoms and ability to function. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that all children be screened for autism. All caregivers should talk to their doctor about ASD screening or evaluation.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological disorder (a "brain" disease) characterized by the presence of persistent (ongoing) communication and social issues. It is a developmental disorder, which begins in early childhood and continues throughout life. Autism spectrum disorder affects most every aspect of life along the way. Cognitive (thinking and language) and social skills are typically developmentally delayed compared to their peers without the disorder. However, their motor (movement) skills develop in a more typical way.
Specific social interaction, communication and behavioral problems must be present before the diagnosis can be made. Though all people with autism show the same overall pattern of impairments, the severity of these issues will vary from case to case. Some people show mild impairments and others have more severe issues.
From a very early age, children with autism spectrum disorder demonstrate difficulties in interacting with other people. They also have trouble with processing social and non-verbal forms of communication, such as eye contact and facial expression. For instance, a typical infant is generally responsive to adult caregiver facial expressions and will imitate those expressions. If a parent smiles at the infant, that infant is likely to smile back. This is not the case with infants on the autism spectrum as they often lack the ability to recognize facial expressions or socially expressed feelings. Children with autism spectrum disorder are also often delayed (sometimes severely so) in their development of spoken language and conversational skills.
    Parenting or child rearing is the process of promoting and supporting the physical,       emotional, social, and intellectual development of a child from infancy to adulthood. When it comes to a disease that their child is suffering from, parents can spend each and everything for the life of their kids. To find whether the child is autistic or neurotypical the Doctors has to check a lot of symptoms and the behaviors, moods, physical health, mental capability of a child at every stage of diagnosis, and sometimes it gets very hard to reach to the accurate results.



Exploratory data analysis (EDA)

Exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an approach to analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often with visual methods. A statistical model can be used or not, but primarily EDA is for seeing what the data can tell us beyond the formal modeling or hypothesis testing task.

For data analysis, Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) must be your first step. Exploratory Data Analysis helps us to ?
* To give insight into a data set.
* Understand the underlying structure.
* Extract important parameters and relationships that hold between them.
* Test underlying assumptions.
To start with,
* Firstly, import the necessary library, pandas in the case.
* Read the csv file using read csv() function of pandas library and each data is separated by the delimiter “;” in given data set.

The Data Set (Autism Spectrum Disorder)

The data set has been given by a clinic specifically for Autism Spectrum Disorder Patients.

















Dataset Preparation (splitting and normalization)
When using  algorithms we should always split our data into a training set and test set. (If the number of experiments we are running is large, then we can should be dividing our data into 3 parts, namely — training set, development set and test set). In our case, we will also separate out some data for manual cross checking.
The data set consists of record of 767 patients in total. To train our model we will be using 650 records. We will be using 100 records for testing, and the last 17 records to cross check our model.

Next, we separate the label and features (for both training and test dataset). In addition to that, we will also convert them into NumPy arrays as our machine learning algorithm process data in NumPy array format.

Deep Learning Model
We are using here DNN-Deep Neural Network.
we create simple Keras neural network with 2 hidden layers one with 500 and and other with 100 with 8 input features and 2 labels to predict on.
























































EDA

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is an approach/philosophy for data analysis that employs a variety of techniques (mostly graphical) to maximize insight into a data set; uncover underlying structure; extract important variables; detect outliers and anomalies; test underlying assumptions; develop parsimonious models; and determine optimal factor settings.

The EDA approach is precisely that--an approach--not a set of techniques, but an attitude/philosophy about how a data analysis should be carried out.
















